motivated	you	will	be	to	maintain	the	habits	associated	with	it.	If	you’re	proud
of	how	your	hair	looks,	you’ll	develop	all	sorts	of	habits	to	care	for	and	maintain
it.	If	you’re	proud	of	the	size	of	your	biceps,	you’ll	make	sure	you	never	skip	an
upper-body	workout.	If	you’re	proud	of	the	scarves	you	knit,	you’ll	be	more
likely	to	spend	hours	
knitting	each	week.	Once	your	pride	gets	involved,	you’ll
fight	tooth	and	nail	to	maintain	your	habits.
True	behavior	change	is	identity	change.	You	might	start	a	habit	because	of
motivation,	but	the	only	reason	you’ll	stick	with	one	is	that	it	becomes	part	of
your	identity.	Anyone	can	convince	themselves	to	visit	the	gym	or	eat	healthy
once	or	twice,	but	if	you	don’t	shift	the	belief	behind	the	behavior,	then	it	is	hard
to	stick	with	long-term	changes.	Improvements	are	only	temporary	until	they
become	part	of	who	you	are.
The	goal	is	not	to	read	a	book,	the	goal	is	to	
become
	a	reader.
The	goal	is	not	to	run	a	marathon,	the	goal	is	to	
become
	a	runner.
The	goal	is	not	to	learn	an	instrument,	the	goal	is	to	
become
	a
musician.
Your	behaviors	are	usually	a	reflection	of	your	identity.	What	you	do	is	an
indication	of	the	type	of	person	you	believe	that	you	are—either	consciously	or
nonconsciously.
*
	
Research	has	shown	that	once	a	person	believes	in	a	particular
aspect	of	their	identity,	they	are	more	likely	to	act	in	alignment	with	that	belief.
For	example,	people	who	identified	as	“being	a	voter”	were	more	likely	to	vote
than	those	who	simply	claimed	“voting”	was	an	action	they	wanted	to	perform.
Similarly,	the	person	who	incorporates	exercise	into	their	identity	doesn’t	have
to	convince	themselves	to	train.	Doing	the	right	thing	is	easy.	After	all,	when
your	behavior	and	your	identity	are	fully	aligned,	you	
are	no	longer	pursuing
behavior	change.	You	are	simply	acting	like	the	type	of	person	you	already
believe	yourself	to	be.
Like	all	aspects	of	habit	formation,	this,	too,	is	a	double-edged	sword.	When
working	for	you,	identity	change	can	be	a	powerful	force	for	selfimprovement.
When	working	against	you,	though,	identity	change	can	be	a	curse.	Once	you
have	adopted	an	identity,	it	can	be	easy	to	let	your	allegiance	to	it	impact	your
ability	to	change.	Many	people	walk	through	life	in	a	cognitive	slumber,	blindly
following	the	norms	attached	to	their	identity. More	precisely,	your	habits	are	how	you	
embody
	your	identity.	When	you
make	your	bed	each	day,	you	embody	the	identity	of	an	organized	person.	When
you	write	each	day,	you	embody	the	identity	of	a	creative	person.	When	you
train	each	day,	you	embody	the	identity	of	an	athletic	person.
The	more	you	repeat	a	behavior,	the	more	you	reinforce	the	identity
associated	with	that	behavior.	In	fact,	the	word	
identity
	was	originally	derived
from	the	Latin	words	
essentitas
,	which	means	
being,
	and	
identidem
,	which
means	
repeatedly
.	
Your	identity	is	literally	your	“repeated	beingness.”
Whatever	your	identity	is	right	now,	you	only	believe	it	because	you	have
proof	of	it.	If	you	go	to	church	every	Sunday	for	twenty	years,	you	have
evidence	that	you	are	religious.	If	you	study	biology	for	one	hour	every	night,
you	have	evidence	that	you	are	studious.	If	you	go	to	the	gym	even	when	it’s
snowing,	you	have	evidence	that	you	are	committed	to	fitness.	The	more
evidence	you	have	for	a	belief,	the	more	strongly	you	will	believe	it.
For	most	of	my	early	life,	I	didn’t	consider	myself	a	writer.	If	you	were	to	ask
any	of	my	high	school	teachers	or	college	professors,	they	would	tell	you	I	was
an	average	writer	at	best:	certainly	not	a	standout.	When	I	began	my	writing
career,	I	published	a	new	article	every	Monday	and	Thursday	for	the	first	few
years.	As	the	evidence	grew,	so	did	my	identity	as	a	writer.	I	didn’t	start	out	as	a
writer.	I	
became
	one	through	my	habits.
Of	course,	your	habits	are	not	the	
only
	actions	that	influence	your	identity,	but
by	virtue	of	their	frequency	they	are	usually	the	most	important	ones.	Each
experience	in	life	modifies	your	self-image,	but	it’s	unlikely	you	would	consider
yourself	a	soccer	player	because	you	kicked	a	ball	once	or	an	artist	because	you
scribbled	a	picture.	As	you	repeat	these	actions,	however,	the	evidence
accumulates	and	your	self-image	begins	to	change.	The	effect	of	one-off
experiences	tends	to	fade	away	while	the	effect	of	habits	gets	reinforced	with
time,	which	means	your	habits	contribute	most	of	the	evidence	that	shapes	your
identity.	In	this	way,	the	process	of	building	habits	is	actually	the	process	of
becoming	yourself.
This	is	a	gradual	evolution.	We	do	not	change	by	snapping	our	
fingers	and
deciding	to	be	someone	entirely	new.	
We	change	bit	by	bit,	day	by	day,	habit	by
habit.	We	are	continually	undergoing	microevolutions	of	the	self.
Each	habit	is	like	a	suggestion:	“Hey,	maybe	
this
	is	who	I	am.”	If	you	finish	a
book,	then	perhaps	you	are	the	type	of	person	who	likes	reading.	If	you	go	to	the
gym,	then	perhaps	you	are	the	type	of	person	who	likes	exercise.	If	you	practice
playing	the	guitar,	perhaps	you	are	the	type	of	person	who	likes	music.
Every	action	you	take	is	a	vote	for	the	type	of	person	you	wish	to	become.	No
single	instance	will	transform	your	beliefs,	but	as	the	votes	build	up,	so	does	the